# Pathways Web Test Automation

This project is forked from the Playwright blueprint, which was created to allow for development teams to start quickly developing UI tests using [Playwright Python](https://playwright.dev/python/), providing the base framework and utilities to allow for initial focus on writing tests, rather than configuration of the framework itself. Playwright is the current mainstream UI testing tool for NHS England, as outlined on the [NHS England Tech Radar](https://radar.engineering.england.nhs.uk/).

> NOTE: This project is currently under initial development so isn't finalised, but should work if you want to experiment with Playwright Python.

## Table of Contents

- [Pathways Web Test Automation](#pathways-web-test-automation)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Setup](#setup)
    - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    - [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Utilities](#utilities)
  - [Using Environment Variables For Secrets](#using-environment-variables-for-secrets)
  - [Contributing](#contributing)
  - [Licence](#licence)

## Setup

You can clone this whole repository using the code below:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/NHSDigital/pathwaysweb-playwright.git
```

### Prerequisites

To utilise the blueprint code, you will need to have the following installed:

- [Python](https://www.python.org/downloads/) 3.12 or greater

Whilst not required to get started, you may also want to [configure a Python virtual environment for your project](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) before proceeding with
the configuration.  If you are using an IDE such as Visual Studio Code or PyCharm, you will normally be prompted to do this automatically.

### Configuration

To get started using Playwright, use the following commands:

```shell
pip install -r requirements.txt
playwright install --with-deps
```

This will install all the necessary packages for executing Playwright tests, and install Playwright ready for use by the framework.  You can test the configuration
has worked by running our example tests, which can be done using the following command (this will run all tests with tracing reports turned on, and in headed mode
so you can see the browser execution):

```shell
pytest tests/test_example.py --tracing on --headed
```

Alternatively if you are using Visual Studio Code as your IDE, we have pre-configured this project to work with the
[Testing functionality](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/testing) so the example tests should be discovered automatically. Click the beaker icon on the left to discover the tests.

## Using Environment Variables For Secrets

This project functionality for saving secret / sensitive values that you would not want present
in the codebase, but require to execute tests locally (such as passwords or API keys).  A local.env file can
be generated by running the [following script](./setup_env_file.py):

```shell
python ./setup_env_file.py
```

This script file is design to be amended / updated as your project evolves, so as more sensitive values are required
for executing tests, the list of keys provided can be updated so for subsequent runs of the script, all the expected
keys are populated within the local.env file (which will need their values setting manually). The intent is that this
script can be run to onboard new team members and provide a local file with all the variables they need to populate.

The local.env file (if present), is read at the start of any test session (via the [conftest.py file](./conftest.py))
and any variables can be accessed by using the Python os library like so:

```python
# Import the OS library
import os

# Access environment variable
os.getenv('<key_from_local.env>')
```

The local.env file is set in the [.gitignore file](./.gitignore), so by default it will not commit if amended.

 > NOTE: You should never commit this file or any secrets in the codebase directly.

## Getting Started

> NOTE: This section is currently under development.

## Contributing

Further guidance on contributing to this project can be found in our [contribution](./CONTRIBUTING.md) page.

## Utilities

This blueprint provides the following utility classes, that can be used to aid in testing:

| Utility                                                       | Description                                  |
| ------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| [Axe](./docs/utility-guides/Axe.md)                           | Accessibility scanning using axe-core.       |
| [Date Time Utility](./docs/utility-guides/DateTimeUtility.md) | Basic functionality for managing date/times. |
| [NHSNumberTools](./docs/utility-guides/NHSNumberTools.md)     | Basic tools for working with NHS numbers.    |
| [User Tools](./docs/utility-guides/UserTools.md)              | Basic user management tool.                  |

## Licence

Unless stated otherwise, the codebase is released under the [MIT License](LICENCE.md). This covers both the codebase and any sample code in the documentation.

Any HTML or Markdown documentation is [© Crown Copyright](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-framework/crown-copyright/) and available under the terms of the [Open Government Licence v3.0](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/).
